(ON CUE)
Shell Oil takes you to the home of the world's greatest musical events --
Carnegie Hall in New York City --
for the New
York Philharmonic Young People's
Concerts under the musical direction of
Leonard Bernstein.
And here is Mr. Bernstein.
Last year, if you remember, we all
had a birthday party here in Carnegie
Hall in honor of the great composer,
Gustav Mahler, who would then
have been 100 years old. Today,
we're going to have a 60th birthday
party for another composer, our own
loved and admired Aaron Copland, and this
time we're going to meet him in person
later in the program. When you do meet
him, I think the first thing about him
that will strike you is his youthfulness —
not only the youthfulness of his face,
but also of his smile, of his conducting
vigor, of his almost boyish personality,
and especially of his spirit. It's almost
impossible to list for you all the
things Mr. Copland has done for the
young during his lifetime; the dozens of
young composers he has rooted for and
brought success to; the even more
dozens whom he has taught at Tanglewood
and at Harvard and at other
places; and most of all, the many pieces
he has written mainly to be performed by
young people.
Well, today we are going
to begin our Copland birthday party
with a young people's overture -- (of
course you remember what an overture is
from our last program, I hope)
-- an overture he wrote
for the High School of Music and Art
Orchestra, here in New York City. It's
called "AN OUTDOOR OVERTURE," and I think
you'll understand immediately why he
called it "outdoor" when you hear
those athletic marchy rhythms,
and those long
melodies filled with fresh air and light.
Here is Aaron Copland's OUTDOOR OVERTURE.
Now that's what you call an outdoor
overture -- it really gets your blood circulating,
like a brisk walk in the woods. And it's
very typical of Copland -- that easy, fresh
style, so open-hearted and frank. But it
shows us only one side of Copland's
music, because the truth is that his
music is
full of variety, like a
flower-garden. There are big juicy white
flowers, and little thorny ones, and great
majestic bushes, and then tiny shy little buds --
all kinds. But perhaps the main
difference in his music is
between the big white ones -- which are so
easy to see and appreciate and even
love, like the overture we just heard -- and
those thorny ones that are not so easy to
see and love right off the bat, and are
sort of tricky to handle, especially at
the first touch. Although some of
Copland's greatest compositions are
thorny ones, I don't see why we shouldn't
play some of them too, especially for
this audience of young people;
your minds are wide-open to
everything, new or old.
Besides, these thorny
pieces aren't really so frightening once
you know a little about them. Here's a
short one, for instance, one of a series
of six short pieces for orchestra called
simply "STATEMENTS." Each of these
statements has a name describing its
own particular feeling, and the one we're
going to hear is called *DOGMATIC"--
That's a very grown-up word meaning
stubborn, believing firmly in something,
and refusing to be talked out of it,
Dogmatic. So this piece begins with a
musical idea that seems made of
rock, it's so hard and firm.
Granite. Iron. Dogmatic.
SKIPPED
Well, that hard-boiled idea is the reason for some of the rocky, thorny sounds you will hear in this piece, but not for all of them.
After all, don't forget that this is modern music,
music of our times and we are living in
some pretty rocky times. Besides, music changes
and grows all through history, like
all ideas; and what used to be
considered right and normal is very
different from what's right and normal
these days.
SKIPPED
For instance that chord we just heard: (PLAY)
That's a rough one, isn't it? I guess Beethoven or Mozart would have thought that one impossible, a dissonance, as it is called.
(PLAY AGAIN)
Modern music. But these days, we're used to it; just see how easy it is to get used to it.
(PLAY 3 or 4 TIMES: pp to ff)
You see? Now it seems quite right and normal. Just because Copland is telling a dogmatic emotion in his music, there's no reason for us listeners to be dogmatic about our musical tastes: we must always be open to new ideas; because ideas in our world are always changing. In the same way, ideas change about what a melody ought to be.
For instance, in the middle of this piece the brass instruments
suddenly blare out a thorny, almost angry theme:
Now that isn't exactly what our elders would have
called a "melody", is it? And yet, it is
a melody. Just look. If I change it just a
little -- not change the notes,
but only the highness or lowness of them,
the theme comes out like this:
Now that sounds a bit
less angry already, doesn't it? (Without all that
leaping around from low to high to low
again.) But I can make it seem even more
normal, more old-fashioned, by
putting old-fashioned chords underneath
it, like this. That could have
been written by Liszt, or anybody,
100 years ago. But this is music of
today; and so Copland doesn't use those
harmonies from long ago and also he does
make the theme jump furiously from one
register to another, so that it does come
out modern, angry and dogmatic.
And as we play it for you now --
the whole thing is less than two minutes
long -- I'd like you to try and feel
like iron, stubborn and
dogmatic, and see if this little piece
doesn't completely satisfy that emotion
you're feeling.
COPLAND - STATEMENTS: No. 3 DOGMATIC
Don't clap. You're not supposed to. It's
as if Aaron Copland
were saying, "This is what I have to say,
and I don't care if you agree with
me or not." That's one side of
Aaron Copland. But, as I
said before, he has many different
sides; and the rest of his pieces on this
program are much friendlier ones, as
you will see. And one
thing they all have in common is
American-ness. Don't forget that
Aaron Copland was born in Brooklyn,
which makes him a 200% American;
and also that he was born
exactly in 1900, the first year of this
century, which makes him 200%
a composer of our time. (Besides,
it makes it so easy to remember how
old he is; he's always just as
old as the year; in 1920
he was 20, in 1940 he was
40, and now he's 60 in 1960. Isn't that a
lucky break?) Now the first of these
American-roots pieces we're going to hear
is a dance from a piece he wrote way back in
1925 -- How old
was Copland then?
That was when he was
first making experiments in using jazz in
symphonic music. This piece is called
"MUSIC FOR THE THEATRE"; and the dance
we're going to hear from it is called
-- "DANCE". I'm sure I don't have to explain
anything to you about the jazz sounds in
it; you'll hear them right off, plain
as day, -- as soon as those trumpets put on their jazz
-mutes, and the drums
start their syncopated rhythms, and the
little high clarinet begins to squeak
out this barrelhouse tune:
That's real tough big-city music. And to
make it even more big-city-ish, Copland has stuck the old tune
"East Side. West Side"
SKIPPED
into the music -- you know it -- (PLAY AND SING)
-- only he's modernized the rhythms from a waltz to 5/8 time,
so that it comes out like this:
Now did you also hear those funny
little notes that were also going on over the
tune? That's another modern side to
this music — sort of little on-purpose
wrong notes that make you want to laugh.
That's about as thorny as this
piece ever gets. It's all
meant to be fun — kind of like Coney
Island music, or clown music; and I hope
you find it as much fun as we do.
We've just had a jazzy example of
Copland's music, so now let's turn to one
that's just the opposite -- very quiet and
serious, but just as American, in another
way. In 1940 Copland wrote a beautiful
and famous score for a movie called "Our Town" --
SKIPPED
I'm sure many of you have seen it, or have maybe seen the original play.
It's about life in a small New Hampshire
town called Grover's Corners, where life
is quiet and sweet and unhurried and very
close to Nature. We're going to hear the
opening music from that film;
SKIPPED
and if it makes you think of church, and hymn-tunes from long ago, well -- you're thinking right, because that's just what he meant.
This is another side of America, another
root, far from the noisy big city we
heard about before; this is the simple
rural American life that is such an
important part of our country. Copland
has often painted that side of America
for us in his music -- as in his famous
ballet, APPALACHIAN SPRING, or in his
opera THE TENDER LAND; but perhaps in
this little piece from the film "0ur Town"
he has painted it best of all, because it
seems so real, so quiet, and so deeply
felt.
Isn't that a lovely picture of
American life -- so different from that jazzy
dance we heard before! Now we move on
to an even differenter picture,
just as American in its
roots, but thousands of miles away, in the
great West of our country. Copland seemed
to be just as fascinated by the West -- by
its exciting history, its pioneer spirit,
the tremendous size of its plains
and its mountains -- as he is by our big cities
and small towns. He has written two
very famous ballets about the West: BILLY
THE KID and RODEO. We're going to hear now the final dance from RODEO,
which is called "HOE-DOVN". I guess you all know what
a rodeo is, but maybe you don't all know
what a hoe-down is. It's a square dance,
with all the trappings -- fiddlers and
callers and swingin' your partner.
We don't have any callers
here, or any partners to swing, but we
sure do have fiddlers! Wait til
you hear them —
COPLAND - RODEO: HOE DOWN (4:00)
Now we have a very special birthday
surprise coming up. The great American
baritone William Warfield is going to
sing two of Copland's songs for us. These
songs are not really original
compositions, since they are old
American folk-songs that almost
everybody knows. But Copland has arranged
them with his special style and
orchestration and with such a personal
understanding and love for them that
they seem to come out as brand-new
pieces by him. I don't know
how he does it; it's part of the magic
that goes on in this wonderful garden
SKIPPED
we are in today. Maybe we could say that that last "HOE-DOWN" is like a big cactus in this garden, with great splashy red flowers blooming on it; but these songs have other American roots, and they come out like little homey, familiar daisies or dandelions;
only Copland's magic touch has given them new color and shape. The names of these
two songs are; "SIMPLE GIFTS" and
"BOUGHT ME A CAT." Here is William Warfield.
And now we come to the big climax of our
party; we're going to meet
Aaron Copland himself, who will conduct
one of his most famous pieces -- "THE
SALON MEXICO" --
(EL SALON MEJICO) -- which is one of his
very friendliest compositions.
SKIPPED
Of course it has little thorns in it, here and there -- certain so called "dissonant" chords, like these --
(PLAY)
or certain tricky modern rhythms, like
these --
(PIANO)
but they're all part of its being modern music, and they won't seem thorny at all when you hear them along with sweet Mexican melodies like this one:
You see, EL SALON MEXICO
is the name of a dance-hall in Mexico City --
sort of like our Roseland -- which Copland
visited once. He was so excited by what
he heard and saw there that he wrote a
piece about it. And so I take tremendous
personal pleasure in welcoming to this
podium a great composer, a dear person, a
true friend to youth, one who has guided
and encouraged so many young people;
including myself when I was just
starting out. My thanks, our thanks, the
thanks of all musicians and music-
lovers all over the country, and all over
the world. Happy birthday, Aaron Copland!
From Carnegie Hall.... another in the New
York Philharmonic Young People's
Concerts under the musical direction of
Leonard Bernstein has been presented by
Shell Oil Company... sign of a better
future for you. This is the second in a
series of four concerts in the Young
People's Series. The next concert will be
presented five weeks from today on
Sunday, March 19th, at which time Mr.
Bernstein will present three soloists
and three youthful conductors in a
program devoted to young performers.
The preceding program was pre-recorded
at Carnegie Hall, New York City, and was
produced and directed by Roger Englander.
(AFTER TELECAST - FOR CARNEGIE HALL AUDIENCE ONLY)
SONGS
-- AARON COPLAND CONDUCTING
-- William Warfield, Baritone